Alexander Reese

**Adaptation Paper**

Peer Production -- INF 385T

Professor James Howison

14 March 2021

(APA Style)



##Peer Production Dynamics in Open-Source Investigation and Citizen Journalism##

Of the many forms of social and economic collaboration engendered by 20^th century information communication technologies, peer production has had one of the most significant and enduring material impacts. Peer production is a mode of collaborative production that relies on three core components: communities of decentralized individuals conceiving of problems and executing their solutions, driven by diverse motivations, and leadership and decision making (governance) that is uncoupled form ownership of the community's products (Benkler, 2016). Original and highly celebrated peer production communities include Free/Libre and Open-Source Software (FLOSS) projects (Linux, GNU, etc) and the Wikipedia project, but peer production has been adapted far beyond these sectors and remain understudied. Accordingly, this paper addresses the adaptation of peer production by the Open-Source Intelligence (OSINT) and citizen journalism project, Bellingcat. Bellingcat leverages an international community of amateur journalists and fact-collecting volunteers to produce original collaborative investigations into military conflicts, human rights abuses, far-right extremism, and criminal activities. The platform also promotes and teaches OSINT techniques by creating freely available how-to-guides and case studies. The collaborative OSINT techniques leveraged by Bellingcat have rivaled and, in significant cases, surpassed -- in terms of speed and accuracy -- both traditional investigative journalism and state-based intelligence operations, making this project politically and academically significant. With its community of international, diversely motivated contributors collaboratively publishing and fostering transparent reporting under dynamic coordination and governance models, Bellingcat represents a successful and nuanced instantiation of peer production.

###BELLINGCAT AND OPEN-SOURCE INTELLIGENCE###

Open-Source Intelligence is widely understood as intelligence derived from information that is freely available from public sources. These include all types of news media, radio and television, and most commonly, social media and other public domain internet resources (Akhgar, 2016). Online investigation in particular focus on photographs, video, and text shared on social media platforms like Twitter, Facebook, and YouTube as well as data and metadata scraped from other online platforms and mobile applications. Investigators also commonly leverage free and low-cost satellite imagery, geo-tagged photographs, and street level imagery produced by Google and other technical service companies to establish the geographic location a video or image was captured. The increasing availability of these resources and steady development of free OSINT tools have led to the steady spread of OSINT techniques and the development of online collaborative communities of both amateurs and professionals. Because source sharing and collective analysis allow investigators to collect and verify information at a level of scale and detail that individual journalists cannot produce, oftentimes from places where foreign journalists cannot go, OSINT techniques are typically highly collaborative. In 2014 a group of OSINT collaborators led by Elliot Higgins established Bellingcat as publishing platform and resource hub for those interested in OSINT investigation.

While still a college-drop-out holding a full-time, "unsatisfying" office job in Leicester, UK, Higgins began learning about and practicing OSINT techniques in 2011 during the Arab Spring.

Much of his early work was spent investigating and reporting on munitions use in the Syrian civil war. In 2012, Higgins started a blog, Brown Moses (https://brown-moses.blogspot.com/), to post his personal findings and those of other members of the fledgling investigative community he found coalescing around online. His unique work and, eventually, his person began to garner attention from large international media outlets, gaining the blog a wider following and allowing him to crowdfund contributions. By 2013, Brown Moses had become a hub for established experts and amateur investigators with shared motives and approaches.

In collaboration with a handful of close contributors and funded by a Kickstarter crowdfunding project, Higgins launched the Bellingcat project website on July 14, 2014. It initially featured both "news" (investigations) and "resources" (how-to guides and case studies). The downing of the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 (MH17) three days after the launch of Bellingcat, became the subject of the platform's first major long-term investigation. Led by Higgins and a team of core-collaborators, it identified Russia's involvement before the Dutch-led international joint investigation team, eliciting a surge in traffic, readership, and press coverage. In the following years, Bellingcat steadily grew in size, scope, publicity, and funding -- through donations, grants, and paid OSINT-training workshops. Since Bellingcat's inception, contributors have investigated and reported on numerous international issues including the poisoning of Sergei Skripal, arms trafficking, international pollution and environmental degradation, police violence, global far-right extremism, and more. Today Bellingcat is registered as a Dutch foundation (*Stichting*) and boasts 18 paid staff members. It continues to produce freely available open-source investigative reports, OSINT guides, case studies, and podcast episodes.

###OPENNESS AND OWNERSHIP###

Though founder Elliot Higgins describes Bellingcat's mission as "open and public," and like foundational FLOSS projects frames the internet as a problem solving tool (Raymond, 1999; cf. Glassman & Kang, 2012), nowhere does he explicitly cite the FLOSS movement as an inspiration for the project. Nevertheless, Bellingcat demonstrates the openness fundamental to peer production in the ways it produces and shares its products. The "open-source" of open-source intelligence (OSINT) refers primarily to the public-domain *inputs* of investigations: the information and media gathered and analyzed by investigators. However, peer production dynamics are dependent on the ownership of project outputs. Though the use open sources does not obligate OSINT investigators to release their *outputs* freely and openly, citizen journalism projects like Bellingcat generally do release their investigations into the public domain (Sampson, 2016). Higgins has gone so far as to state that the central "openness" of Bellingcat lies not in its sources, but in the transparency of its reporting. For Higgins this style of open reporting involves foreground evidentiary media, citing its source, demonstrating their analysis, and declaring doubts and uncertainties openly.

Importantly, Bellingcat leadership believes that the platoform's open method of reporting and publishing is essential not only for the credibility of their stories, but so that new contributors can reproduce their results and apply their techniques to future investigations. To draw a close comparison to FLOSS projects, these open and transparent investigations are akin to freely available source code, which allows users to directly build on the work of others because they can view and edit "the architecture of the product" (Levine & Prietula, 2014, p. 1416). To this end, Bellingcat also publishes completely free how-to guides and case-studies that teach and demonstrate OSINT techniques. Examples include "Using the Sun and the Shadows for Geolocation" (van der Weide, 2020) and "A Beginner's Guide To Flight Tracking," (Fiorella, 2019)  and "How To Track Illegal Funding Campaigns Via Cryptocurrency" (Smith, 2019). To continue the previous comparison, Bellingcat's guides can be thought of as a type of user documentation commonly produced within FLOSS projects.

As with FLOSS projects, the open availability of Bellingcat's products and the transparency of its process are beneficial, even necessary, to the project's successful operation as collaborative community. By producing transparent, informative, even didactic reporting and instructional materials, Bellingcat can be seen to employ the classic FLOSS strategy of turning a product's users into contributors (Raymond, 1999). In more technical terms, transparent reporting and how-to guides greatly reduces the "search costs" associated with finding volunteers able and willing (or "adequately motivated") to contribute to the community and its projects -- in the case of Belingcat, initiating investigations or contribute insights into those already underway (Howison & Crowston, 2014). Bellingcat is able to openly solicit collaboration because the platform does not share the traditional journalistic need to protect "scoops" or the identity of their sources (Atton, 2013), just as FLOSS projects obviate the traditional software firm's "strategic need for secrecy" (Howison & Crowston, 2014, p. 46).

###CONTRIBUTOR MOTIVATIONS###

As a peer production community with decentralized contributors and several points of entry into the project, Bellingcat's mission and fairly open structure effectively harnesses and directs a wide range of intrinsic and extrinsic contributor motivations. Intrinsic motivations speak to the inherent satisfaction, enjoyment, or "hedonic gain" elicited by an activity (Benkler, 2016; Crowston & Fagnot, 2018; Mortensen et al., 2016; Nov, 2007), whereas extrinsic motivations are tied to achieving separable outcomes (Ryan & Deci, 2000). Bellingcat has a current staff of 18, whose motivations are at least partly extrinsic and monetary. This configuration is not uncommon in FLOSS peer production communities however, where up to half of all contributors may be motivated monetarily (Benkler, 2016). Still, the majority of these paid staff members joined the project as unpaid volunteers and scores of other current volunteers donate time and energy to the project without contracting and monitoring.

In a personal communication, Wim Zwijnenburg, a long-time Bellingcat volunteer contributor with a focus on environmental OSINT investigations in the Middle East, stated a strong belief that Bellingcat is "not driven by egos or monetary gains, but curiosity and the will to solve problems and expose perpetrators of crimes" (Personal communication, March 10, 2021). Here Zwijnenburg suggests that an intrinsically sited curiosity and an internalized extrinsic set of values are key drivers among many Bellingcat contributors.

Although Zwijnenburg, did not identify the act of OSINT investigation as explicitly "fun," he did express an intrinsic enjoyment of OSINT's ability to satisfy participant's "curiosity to understand how to dissect a problem and find answers" (W. Zwijnenburg, personal communication, March 10, 2021). In his book-length account of discovering OSINT techniques and establishing Bellingcat, Higgins also highlights other personal affective intensities related to OSINT investigation, ranging from curiosity and intrigue to thrills, rushes, and obsession. In their work on intrinsic and extrinsic motivations to learning, Ryan and Deci classify curiosity and a desire for challenge as intrinsically motivating (2000; see also Litman, 2005; Perlovsky et al., 2010), while Shah links a desire for "challenge" to enjoyment, identifying it as key intrinsic driver of FLOSS hobbyists (2006).

As in Wikipedia and FLOSS projects (Nov, 2007; Stallman, 1999, 2010), "ideology" and "values" appear to be key motivators for Zwijnenburg, Higgins, and other Bellingcat contributors.  Higgins and Zwijnenburg seize particularly upon ideas of justice, truth, and morality. Though they may be highly internalized (introjected and integrated), because these ideals are often attached to real-world outcomes -- e.g. the end of armed conflict, environmental remediation, governmental accountability -- they are thought of as extrinsic motivations (Ryan & Deci, 2000). Higgins frequently and explicitly aligns Bellingcat with an ideology of citizen journalism -- that "ordinary citizens" can and *should* be involved in the journalistic pursuit of "justice and truth" (Higgins, 2021, p. 163). Again and again he professes a commitment to human rights advocacy, stating, "we show ordinary citizens how to expose wrongdoing and demand accountability from the powerful" (Higgins, 2021, p. 18). Zwijnenburg appears to be in full agreement with Higgins' normative framing of Bellingcat, expressing a commitment to "expos[ing] perpetrators of crimes...saving lives, protecting livelihoods and improv[ing] the general protection of civilians and the environment in armed conflicts" (W. Zwijnenburg, personal communication, March 10, 2021).

While Higgins and Zwijnenburg express an outwardly directed altruism (towards victims of conflict and oppression), such motivations are also common directed internally too peers and collaborators within production communities, and Bellingcat is no exception (Levine & Prietula, 2014). In our exchange, Zwijnenburg emphasized several times the cooperative nature of Bellingcat as a community of volunteers "that share and collaborate, and with this help each other to move forward," which he went so far as to call the "essence of the OSINT community" (Personal communication, March 10, 2021). Higgins, in turn, emphasizes the importance of pooling insights, making sense of evidence together, and teaching one other, concluding that "the collaborative spirit marked online investigation from the start and infuses Bellingcat to this day" (2021, p. 26). Benkler has insightfully observed that, because the inevitably diverse motivations of contributors can complicate the functioning of a peer production system, significant effort is often put into normatively framing virtues, common values, and ultimately motivations that encourage (or even select for) prosocial behaviors (2016).

###COORDINATION & GOVERNANCE###

Given that Bellingcat, like FLOSS communities, takes advantage of widely distributed, diversely motivated volunteers, decision making and coordinating the intertwined work of contributors is of prime importance to the success of the project. In the context of open-source software production, these processes are referred to as "governance" and "coordination," but are deeply intertwined. Malone and Crowston have identified coordination as the management of "dependencies between activities" (Malone & Crowston, 1994), while Shaikh and Hendfridsson have framed governance, in turn, as "the authoritative framework for coordinating activities in open-source development," and "configurations of coordination processes" (Shaikh & Henfridsson, 2017, pp. 116, 117). Because Bellingcat engages in a wide variety of activities -- investigating, reporting, and teaching -- at a variety of scales, it demonstrates diverse and flexible modes of governance and coordination.

Bellingcat investigations are diverse and dynamic, and can proceed in several ways. Contributors can pursue fairly discrete independent stories, collecting sources and applying OSINT techniques to draw conclusions in teams of one or two. Zwijnenburg often works this way, having produced one-off environmental OSINT reports on pollution in Iraq's Shatt Al-Arab river (Zwijnenburg, 2020) and the effect of armed conflict on date palms agriculture in Yemen (Zwijnenburg, 2020). Larger and more complex investigations -- such as those in the downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH17 and the poisoning of Sergei and Yulia Skripal in Salisbury, UK -- proceed highly collaboratively, involving many contributors and resulting in multiple published reports and articles over longer periods. Coordination processes and structures of governance are necessarily different across these two types of investigations.  

Though independent OSINT investigations can be thought of as highly modular -- separable, distinct, independent -- thereby demonstrating minimal interdependencies and necessary coordination (Howison & Crowston, 2014; Lindberg et al., 2016), it would be wrong to assume that independent investigations are hermetically sealed from outside input and collaboration. Zwijnenburg made clear that even when undertaking these OSINT investigations, investigators nearly always seek peer input on their investigative methods and conclusions. Zwijnenburg stated: " I always ask for second or third opinions. I've been wrong so often in my initial assumptions cause we tend to look at problems through our own lens, which limits our perception. Being aware of this is elementary to prevent mistakes" (W. Zwijnenburg, personal communication, March 10, 2021). Even investigators whom Zwijnenburg considers to be more experienced (mostly recently, an investigator with the BBC who was struggling with a specific geolocation problem) regularly ask him for his assistance. According to Zwijnenburg, providing feedback and assistance is a common and "mutual effort that we all learn from" (Personal communication, March 10, 2021). Clearly even the most modular and independent OSINT work demonstrates interdependencies and necessitates coordination.

Not surprisingly, larger stores demand highly complex investigations and demonstrate many more interdependencies and coordination processes. These proceed highly collaboratively and even organically among contributors. Investigators are initially confronted with so many unknowns that the overarching goal and the tasks and subtasks necessary to achieving it are rarely clear from the start. Investigations thus proceed and evolve dynamically as sources are collected are analyzed and new leads and avenues for inquiry open up to investigators. This coordination process demonstrates interdependencies among tasks and contributors that are best described by Malone and Crowston's governance model of "bottom-up goal identification" rather than "top-down goal decomposition" (1994). Each successful application of OSINT techniques which produces a verifiable fact or conclusion and, at a larger scale, each published report, can then be thought of as a *layer* similar to the layers of discrete, independent artifacts of work applied by contributors to FLOSS codebase (Howison & Crowston, 2014).

These dynamics of interdependency and coordination are present to some degree in almost all of Bellingcat's collaborative investigations, however early investigations, like those into the Syrian civil war, which were characterized primarily by communication via Twitter, were more typically organic and ad hoc in this way. Higgins describes this early mode of communication and collaboration as "a hive mind of amateur sleuths...all converging around the next big question, whether geolocating a fresh photo or parsing the validity of a social media video" (Higgins, 2021, pp. 80--81). This collective, open, bottom-up decision-making strategy, was facilitated by social media technology and its allowances for both synchronous and asynchronous, multi-vocal and multi-nodal communication. Therefore, these investigations align with Malone and Crowston's "adhocracy" governance model characterized by highly flexible organizations, which often include many shifting project teams and "decentralized networks of communication among relatively autonomous entrepreneurial groups" (Malone & Crowston, 1994, p. 17). These same dynamics align with Shaikh and Henfridsson's "meritocratic idea-testing" coordination process, whereby "multiple divergent views are negotiated in a transparent manner so as to enable open questioning and testing of ideas in order to make them strong" (Shaikh & Henfridsson, 2017, p. 12).

However, as the organization structure and communication tools of Bellingcat have shifted over the years, so have other facets of its community's coordination and governance. As Higgin's OSINT ambitions grew and he identified "key partners" and collaborators to help establish the Bellingcat community. As a result, Bellingcat's first official collaborative OSINT investigation -- the downing of flight MH17 in July of 2014 -- was driven by a core group of more tightly coordinated collaborators. The key shift in coordination and governance came in Higgins' decision to establish the mobile app Slack as the primary communication tool and online workspace for him and these core collaborators, whereby collaborative investigation became less open and more modular, with formalized decision-making. Unlike in the prior Syrian civil war investigations wherein Bellingcat investigators pursued leads and shared findings with one another in real time on Twitter, the Slack platform allowed members of this core team to communicate their sources and findings on *private* message boards, then showcase their kay findings and conclusions (as well as the sources and techniques in typical Bellingcat fashion) in discrete, regularly released articles on the Bellingcat site.

The wider community of interested parties, open-source fact checkers, and even professional journalists were still able to follow the collaborative Bellingcat investigation and provide feedback and new leads via Twitter (as the Bellingcat site does not have a comments section) but the flow of communication and coordination was more tightly controlled. Higgins reports that, as new amateur investigators contacted him with findings related to the MH17 investigation, he would vet the accuracy of their OSINT methods then decide if the work merited an article, which he asked that they write -- all, of course, while maintaining some influence over its tone, structure, and style (Higgins, 2021). Despite this change in coordination strategies, the investigation received crucial feedback and key contributions from new volunteers who later became core Bellingcat investigators.

As opposed to the ad hoc hive mind of the Syrian investigation, here the components of the investigative solution (i.e. determining the circumstances of the downing of flight MH17) were increasingly separated into discrete problems, able to be investigated independently and proposed to the core Bellingcat team for recombination with their work (Crowston et al., 2019). In this way, the Bellingcat project began to leverage arm's length coordination between new contributors and core investigators (while still allowing for close contact coordination among those core investigators themselves) (Lindberg et al., 2016). This independent modular work can also be thought of in terms of "branching" in version-controlled open-source software development. In the terms of open-source software development, while Bellingcat's core contributors work together on their core (main/master) branch of the investigation, publishing (or committing) updates to their investigation as they see fit. Lower-level volunteers "clone" the findings of this core investigation, using it to inform independent research that leads to changes and additions. These changes are then submitted as a formalized "pull request" to core investigators (developers or "project insiders") to be reviewed and evaluated for their quality and utility and accordingly accepted, integrated, and published or denied (Vasilescu et al., 2015). So while the site's free guides and transparent, didactic reporting allow any interested party to undertake open-source investigation, contributions in the form of publication to the Bellingcat site (or source code), is managed by a select few -- paid staff members, core volunteer contributors, and Higgins himself (the committers and maintainers of an open-source software project).

Higgins came to see Bellingcat's early investigation into the MH17 as a model for "long-term projects" wherein "a core group could push beyond an initial successful finding, drawing together the efforts of volunteers and journalists on the ground, to amass something far more comprehensive" (Higgins, 2021, p. 100), and future investigations proceeded in a similar manner. Though it has shifted and expanded, the core group of investigators remains in place today as the "Bellingcat Investigation Team" -- which the website describes as a "group of volunteers and full time investigators who make up the core of the Bellingcat's investigative efforts" (Contributors, n.d.). Much informal communication between collaborators and interested newcomers to the Bellingcat community continues on Twitter, but aspiring collaborators outside of this core team wanting to contribute reporting to Bellingcat must engage in the formal process of submission by emailing <submissions@bellingcat.com>.

While this pull-request structure mirrors the governance dynamics of many open-source software projects, it should be noted that open communication and decision-making -- wherein submissions and their evaluations can be seen by all -- is seen as the default in these communities and stands in contrast to Bellingcat's method of private submission and evaluation. Though private communication channels are common among FLOSS project leaders and decision makers, they seem to be used more sparingly in the decision-making process (Fogel, 2009).

As in open-source software communities, admission to these ranks of "core contributors" (committers and maintainers) -- is theoretically always open to those demonstrating the requisite combination of skill and effort. Higgins proudly declares that "open-source investigation is not about formal qualifications. Your reputation is your results... We [are] an open community of amateurs" (Higgins, 2021, pp. 32--33). However, as with open-source software, no successful project can be completely open. Each project confers different authority to different users, and requires that its users adhere to specific processes of coordination.

###CONCLUSION###

What we find with open-source investigation is that, similar to methods of software development, the production of investigative journalism has moved beyond models of individual and or firm-based production and into peer production communities. Technological and organization innovations have allowed groups of diverse and highly dispersed individuals leverage publicly accessible and verifiable information, develop and articulate new knowledge, and act on diverse motivations to produce influential reporting and dynamic community structures.

***

###SOURCES###

Akhgar, B. (2016). OSINT as an Integral Part of the National Security Apparatus. In B. Akhgar, P. S. Bayerl, & F. Sampson (Eds.), *Open Source Intelligence Investigation* (pp. 3--9). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-47671-1_1

Atton, C. (2013). Separate, supplementary or seamless? Alternative news and professional journalism. In C. Peters & M. J. Broersma (Eds.), *Rethinking Journalism* (pp. 143--155). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203102688-18

Benkler, Y. (2016). Peer Production and Cooperation. In J. Bauer & M. Latzer (Eds.), *Handbook on the Economics of the Internet* (pp. 91--119). Edward Elgar Publishing. https://doi.org/10.4337/9780857939852

*Contributors*. (n.d.). Bellingcat. Retrieved March 13, 2021, from https://www.bellingcat.com/contributors/

Crowston, K., & Fagnot, I. (2018). Stages of motivation for contributing user-generated content: A theory and empirical test. *International Journal of Human-Computer Studies*, *109*, 89--101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2017.08.005

Crowston, K., Saltz, J. S., Rezgui, A., Hegde, Y., & You, S. (2019). Socio-technical Affordances for Stigmergic Coordination Implemented in MIDST, a Tool for Data-Science Teams. *Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction*, *3*(CSCW), 1--25. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359219

Fiorella, G. (2019, October 15). *A Beginner's Guide To Flight Tracking*. Bellingcat. https://www.bellingcat.com/resources/how-tos/2019/10/15/a-beginners-guide-to-flight-tracking/

Fogel, K. (2009). *Producing Open Source Software: How to Run a Successful Free Software Project.* O'Reilly Media, Inc. http://public.ebookcentral.proquest.com/choice/publicfullrecord.aspx?p=443307

Glassman, M., & Kang, M. J. (2012). Intelligence in the internet age: The emergence and evolution of Open Source Intelligence (OSINT). *Computers in Human Behavior*, *28*(2), 673--682. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2011.11.014

Higgins, E. (2021). *We Are Bellingcat: An Intelligence Agency for the People*. Bloomsbury.

Howison, J., & Crowston, K. (2014). Collaboration Through Open Superposition: A Theory of the Open Source Way. *MIS Quarterly*, *38*(1), 29--50. https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2014/38.1.02

Levine, S. S., & Prietula, M. J. (2014). Open Collaboration for Innovation: Principles and Performance. *Organization Science*, *25*(5), 1414--1433. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2013.0872

Lindberg, A., Berente, N., Gaskin, J., & Lyytinen, K. (2016). Coordinating Interdependencies in Online Communities: A Study of an Open Source Software Project. *Information Systems Research*, *27*(4), 751--772. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2016.0673

Litman, J. (2005). Curiosity and the pleasures of learning: Wanting and liking new information. *Cognition and Emotion*, *19*(6), 793--814. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699930541000101

Malone, T. W., & Crowston, K. (1994). The interdisciplinary study of coordination. *ACM Computing Surveys*, *26*(1), 87--119. https://doi.org/10.1145/174666.174668

Mortensen, T., Keshelashvili, A., & Weir, T. (2016). Who We Are: A Q-study of types of citizen journalists. *Digital Journalism*, *4*(3), 359--378. https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2015.1053506

Nov, O. (2007). What motivates Wikipedians? *Communications of the ACM*, *50*(11), 60--64. https://doi.org/10.1145/1297797.1297798

Perlovsky, L. I., Bonniot-Cabanac, M.-, & Cabanac, M. (2010). Curiosity and pleasure. *The 2010 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN)*, 1--3. https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN.2010.5596867

Raymond, E. (1999). The cathedral and the bazaar. *Knowledge, Technology & Policy*, *12*(3), 23--49. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12130-999-1026-0

Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivations: Classic Definitions and New Directions. *Contemporary Educational Psychology*, *25*(1), 54--67. https://doi.org/10.1006/ceps.1999.1020

Sampson, F. (2016). Following the Breadcrumbs: Using Open Source Intelligence as Evidence in Criminal Proceedings. In B. Akhgar, P. S. Bayerl, & F. Sampson (Eds.), *Open Source Intelligence Investigation: From Strategy to Implementation* (pp. 295--304). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-47671-1_18

Shah, S. K. (2006). Motivation, Governance, and the Viability of Hybrid Forms in Open Source Software Development. *Management Science*, *52*(7), 1000--1014. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1060.0553

Shaikh, M., & Henfridsson, O. (2017). Governing open source software through coordination processes. *Information and Organization*, *27*(2), 116--135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infoandorg.2017.04.001

Smith, B. (2019, March 26). *How To Track Illegal Funding Campaigns Via Cryptocurrency*. Bellingcat. https://www.bellingcat.com/resources/how-tos/2019/03/26/how-to-track-illegal-funding-campaigns-via-cryptocurrency/

Stallman, R. (1999). The GNU Operating System and the Free Software Movement. In *Open sources: Voices from the open source revolution* (1st ed, pp. 53--70). O'Reilly.

Stallman, R. (2010). *Free software, free society: Selected essays of Richard M. Stallman* (J. Gay, Ed.). SoHo Books.

van der Weide, Y. (2020, December 3). *Using the Sun and the Shadows for Geolocation*. Bellingcat. https://www.bellingcat.com/resources/2020/12/03/using-the-sun-and-the-shadows-for-geolocation/

Vasilescu, B., Yu, Y., Wang, H., Devanbu, P., & Filkov, V. (2015). Quality and productivity outcomes relating to continuous integration in GitHub. *Proceedings of the 2015 10th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering*, 805--816. https://doi.org/10.1145/2786805.2786850

Zwijnenburg, W. (2020, July 24). *Yemen's Disappearing Date Palms: Applied Environmental OSINT*. Bellingcat. https://www.bellingcat.com/news/mena/2020/07/24/yemens-disappearing-date-palms-applied-environmental-osint/

Zwijnenburg, W. (2020, November 10). *Troubled Waters: Documenting Pollution of Iraq's Shatt Al-Arab River---Bellingcat*. Bellingcat. https://www.bellingcat.com/news/mena/2020/11/10/troubled-waters-documenting-pollution-of-iraqs-shatt-al-arab-river/