Elizabeth Seeley  
Peer Production Adaptation – Austin Covaid  
INF 385T, James Howison  
March 11, 2021  
APA Citations  

# Co-Creation within Radical Acts of Care: Exploring the Intersections between Mutual Aid and Peer Production

In mutual aid and commons-based peer production, participants collaborate for mutual benefit within a self-organizing community. Mutual aid, a term used in organizational theory to describe the tactic of working together to collectively ensure survival, is by no means a modern phenomenon. The collaboration necessary for the saying “Strength in numbers” to ring true occurs within almost all aspects of life, from the evolutionary symbiosis of bacteria to Henry Ford’s assembly line. However, in response to the breakdown and subsequent distrust of government services during the COVID-19 crisis, mutual aid has been adopted by the current leftist movement in the United States to describe self-organized, community-led organizations deliberately independent from any government or charity organizations. These mutual aid organizations are simultaneously radical and ancient in their mission to collect, coordinate, and redistribute services and resources to community members in need.   
  
Using the mutual aid organization Austin Covaid as an adaptive case study, this paper investigates the intersections between mutual aid and commons-based peer production, the socio-technical practice of co-collaboration within Internet communities. Although Austin Covaid relies on an internet application created and maintained through peer production to mobilize community members and fulfill need requests, the user base of the organization remains surprisingly unaware of the parallel philosophies of mutual aid and peer production. Based on my own observations participating in Austin Covaid, my interview with Jess Hallam, a major contributor within the community, and the anarcho-communist leanings present in both organizational models, I argue that young mutual aid organizations like Austin Covaid share significant facets of their organizational methodology with online peer production communities. This affinity raises the possibility that mutual aid organizations could borrow from the better-established pedagogy of peer production in order to more effectively serve their mission.

## Anarcho-Communism as an Antecedent of Contribution Motivations

Form follows function. But, to function, there must be action, and therefore, motivation towards that action. (Ryan & Deci, 2000) Although literature on peer production often focuses on what motivates participants to contribute (Benkler, 2016; Benkler & Nissenbaum, 2006; Gulati et al., 2012; Oreg & Nov, 2008; Shah, 2006), motivation is also what activates the function of a peer production community. In other words, motivations of participants shape the function, and therefore the form, of the organization itself. Oreg and Nov refer to this aspect of motivation as the “antecedents of contribution motivations,” arguing that a combination of “personality and context” motivates an individual to be motivated to contribute within peer production. (Oreg & Nov, 2008) Although Oreg and Nov discuss “personality and context” within the context of pre-established peer production communities, motivational antecedents are also what influence the creation of the community, and beyond that, the characteristics of commons-based peer production as a broad organizational model. When approached from this perspective, commons-based peer production’s “antecedents to contribution motivations” mirror the “antecedents to contribution motivations” of mutual aid, which both involve a radical, anarcho-communist approach to the digital economy.  
  
Yochai Benkler describes peer production communities as having three distinct organizational characteristics: “(a) Decentralization of conception and execution . . ., (b) harnessing diverse motivations, and (c) separation of governance and management from property and contract.” (Benkler, 2016) Commons-based peer production, or CBPP, is separate from what Benkler refers to as “firm-based peer production,” where control over the infrastructure and data held within a website is used to consolidate power over the user base, often because of financial motivations. (Benkler, 2016) Instead, in CBPP:  “Authority to act resides with individual agents faced with opportunities for action, rather than in . . . the manager of a firm or a bureaucrat . . . social cues and motivations, rather than prices or commands . . . motivate and coordinate the action of participating agents.” (Benkler & Nissenbaum, 2006) In other words, CBPP is explicitly non-hierarchical and anti-capitalist. In Free Labor: Producing Culture for the Digital Economy, Tiziana Terranova argues that while the Internet itself is neither capital nor anticapital, it is a mutation of late capitalism in which inherent decentralization, ie. anarchism, converges with communism through the “potlatch” of peer production. (Terranova, 2000) Although Benkler and Helen Nissenbaum avoid the political designation of anarcho-capitalism, they unpack the decentralized communalism of CBPP by discussing the implications of virtue-based, almost altruistic motivations within CBPP, explaining that CBPP represents a design paradigm in which “virtue leads people to participate in commons-based peer projects, and . . . participation may give rise to virtue.” (Benkler & Nissenbaum, 2006) Virtue/participation reciprocity, achieved within a decentralized, non-hierarchical, and anti-capitalist space, also describes the philosophy of mutual aid.  
  
Mutual aid is an organizational model of “radical collective care” characterized by an explicitly decentralized and participatory approach to addressing needs within a community. (Spade, 2020) The concept was popularized by Peter Kropotkin, a Russian anarcho-communist whose 1902 book Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution describes the prevalence of collaboration within the collective struggle for survival. (Kropotkin, 2006) The modern iteration of mutual aid as an organization is attributed to Dean Spade, a radical organizer whose book Mutual Aid: Building Solidarity During this Crisis (and the Next), outlines a “grassroots theory” of mutual aid that can be used to simultaneously help people while also mobilizing a community politically. Spade describes mutual aid as “the radical act of caring for each other while working to change the world.” (Spade, 2020) According to Spade, while mutual aid organizations exist to help community members in need (ie. virtue/participation reciprocity), they remain intentionally separate from what he refers to as “Hierarchical, Charitable Non-Profits and Social Service Programs (or what tends to change about mutual aid projects as they move toward becoming charities or social service programs),” similar to CBPP’s desire to remain separate from the control within firm-based peer production. (Spade, 2019) In contrast to traditional models of charity where those within the organization help those outside of the organization, all users- coordinators, volunteers, and requesters- within a mutual aid organization are considered active participants who contribute to the non-hierarchical, self-organized community. These users in turn have diverse motivations in terms of their desire to participate in the organization, beyond the underlying non-hierarchical, anti-capitalist “antecedents to contribution motivations” that are why mutual aid organizations exist. 

## Austin Covaid: Organizational Dynamics

I conducted an interview with Jess Hallam, a “coordinator” participant in the organization, in order to get a better grasp of the dynamics, problems, and solutions within Austin Covaid. The following sections integrate my knowledge of the organization as a “volunteer” participant, comments and quotes from Jess, and comparisons between the mutual aid organization and a traditional peer production community.  
  
Austin Covaid uses Covaid, an open-source software application developed by college students and hosted on GitHub, to directly connect volunteers to people requesting support within the city of Austin. (Covaid, 2021; Purkayastha et al., 2020/2021) As an application, Covaid is a simple task management software that allows digital coordinators to facilitate no-contact pick-up and delivery services, grocery purchases, in kind donations, emotional support, academic support, and other miscellaneous services. (Austin Mutual Aid | Covaid Call for Volunteers, 2020; Covaid Volunteer Portal, 2021) It functions as a low-commitment, single request, single fulfillment system where users in need submit discrete requests regarding a specific need, and users who wish to volunteer fulfill these discrete requests based on when they have the time and resources to do so. In between these tasks is the act of coordination, where users match requests to available volunteers. In keeping with Dean Spade’s characterization of mutual aid organizations as rejecting any system of “imposing eligibility criteria for services that divide people into ‘deserving’ and ‘undeserving’,” no verification or paperwork is required to claim legitimacy on either end. (J. Hallam, personal communication, March 11, 2021; Spade, 2019)  
  
Austin Covaid encompasses three participant groups: requesters, who are motivated by their need for assistance; volunteers, who are motivated by their desire to fulfill requests; and coordinators, who are motivated by their desire to aid both volunteers and requesters. Coordinators are the only participants with established commitments to the organization. They have a weekly volunteer shift in which they receive requests and assign requests to volunteers, on top of leadership commitments discussed in more detail in the following paragraph. (J. Hallam, personal communication, March 11, 2021) Crossover between the user groups is rare, but not unheard of. According to Jess, the most common form of role crossover is the “redistribution that goes on between requesters to other members of their community.” (J. Hallam, personal communication, March 11, 2021) I experienced this when I fulfilled a request for multiple cases of water after the winter storm; the woman who made the request explained that the water was for her as well as for her neighbors. Another example is Austin Covaid’s bread redistribution program, where Austin Covaid volunteers work with Whole Foods to pick up day-old bread. (J. Hallam, personal communication, March 11, 2021) The bread is delivered to requesters who have already established themselves as participants within Austin Covaid; these requesters then redistribute the bread to other people in need. A non-requester example of role crossover is the transition of volunteers who fulfill requests to becoming coordinators; three of the nine coordinators were originally volunteers. (J. Hallam, personal communication, March 11, 2021) Many coordinators also volunteer by fulfilling requests. (J. Hallam, personal communication, March 11, 2021) The ample role crossover that occurs between participant groups within Austin Covaid is comparable to the process of employing and encouraging diverse motivations for participation within peer production.  
  
In terms of decision making and governance models, Austin Covaid, according to Jess, is “explicitly non-hierarchical,” in keeping with characterizations of mutual aid organizations within available literature. However, when I pressed Jess further, it became apparent that hierarchies do exist in Austin Covaid. Decision making occurs during virtual meetings that happen on a need-driven basis, and although these decisions are made through consensus, the consensus only occurs between the coordinators. (J. Hallam, personal communication, March 11, 2021) Similar to the meritocratic governance model within peer production communities, only coordinators within Austin Covaid are explicitly involved in the decision-making process, although, again in keeping with the meritocratic model, feedback from all users is accepted and addressed. (Gardler & Hanganu, 2013; J. Hallam, personal communication, March 11, 2021) Because they have a regular participation shift and are responsible for making changes to the community based on the feedback of the other participant groups, coordinators see themselves as having “earned authority through contribution,” to use the words of Gardler and Hanganu from OSS Watch. (Gardler & Hanganu, 2013) The majority of the coordinators are also the founding participants of Austin Covaid, and therefore are also comparable to the benevolent dictator model within peer production. (Gardler & Hanganu, 2013)  
  
When asked about feedback and integration of that feedback, Jess was quick to state that there was no formal system in place. However, she said, “Experiential feedback, such as challenges when coordinating, requesting or volunteering, are typically obvious to coordinators because they are the ones responsible for dealing with logistical issues.” (J. Hallam, personal communication, March 11, 2021) These comments are either addressed and integrated within a bit.ly page that serves as the equivalent of a README file within GitHub, or solved on a “one to one level in order to address one specific person’s needs,” according to Jess. (J. Hallam, personal communication, March 11, 2021) Feedback that requires more drastic changes to the community is typically tested and integrated using a solution development strategy that privileges a quick turnaround, similar to agile software development. According to Jess, this form of feedback typically emerges due to an emergency situation and the need to immediately address the problem and find a solution as quickly as possible, often at the expense of a more efficient, long term solution because of the urgency of the problem. (J. Hallam, personal communication, March 11, 2021) These problem/solution examples are discussed in greater detail in the following section. 

## Austin Covaid: Challenges, Problems and Solutions

The greatest existential challenge to Austin Covaid occurred because of the desire for the organization to retain the characteristics of non-hierarchical community autonomous from government regulation. Austin Covaid was originally developed as a resource under Austin Mutual Aid (AMA), an organization founded in March 2020 to facilitate, through social media, the direct distribution of resources to those in need amidst the emergence of the COVID-19 epidemic in the Austin community. (Fisher, 2020) AMA began the process of becoming an unincorporated 501(c) nonprofit after they received a flood of donations and national media recognition during the devastating winter storm in Texas during the week of February 14, 2021. (J. Hallam, personal communication, February 28, 2021) In light of this move, Austin Covaid’s coordinators decided through universal consensus that Austin Covaid would unaffiliate with AMA in order to preserve the practice of mutual aid. Austin Covaid broke with AMA in order to preserve their ability to do non-hierarchical, de-professionalized, and participatory direct aid without any government or charity involvement. (J. Hallam, personal communication, February 28, 2021; Spade, 2019) Austin Covaid explicitly separated from AMA to protect the organization from anything resembling a contractual, nonautonomous commitment. In peer production terms, Austin Covaid broke from AMA in a move that could be easily described as “Hard Fork Governance.” (Red, 2019)  
  
The Covaid platform itself represents another challenge to Austin Covaid. While Austin Covaid exists through the development and proliferation of the Covaid platform, Austin Covaid must supplement the Covaid platform using diverse tools and tactics “developed” by non-developer members of the Austin Covaid community, such as relying on other applications and software, like Google Sheets and Signal chat, to fulfill the needs of the organization. (J. Hallam, personal communication, March 11, 2021) This approach to addressing community-specific unresolved interdependencies is indicative of the decentralized collaboration necessary within a peer production community and remarkably divergent from the discussion of unresolved developer interdependencies by Lindberg et. al. (Lindberg et al., 2016) In our interview, Jess Hallam described the problems and solutions associated with the platform as again emerging in relation to emergency need. During the winter storm, the influx of both requester and volunteer participants meant that coordinators were not able to keep up with need because of the limitations of the design of Covaid. The platform is designed so that coordinators manually match each request to each volunteer. During the winter storm, there was no time for this to occur, especially given how urgent some of the requests were, and the limited number of coordinators. On top of this, there was system in place to quickly onboard other coordinators. As a result, Austin Covaid began using other platforms that reduced the amount of hierarchy inherent in the Covaid internet application. They did this by simply creating a Signal chat where volunteers could directly coordinate with requesters and other volunteers in other to make sure people’s needs were fulfilled.  
  
Another challenge that emerged out of the winter storm was the desire and need to create an effective system for cash redistribution. Within the span of a day, Austin Covaid’s coordinators created a system in which requests were received using the Covaid platform, crowdfunded using Instagram, collected using Venmo, and then redistributed using Zelle or CashApp. However, because of repeat requests from the same users, a Google Form was integrated in order to provide a level of verification. However, this verification need resembled the eligibility gatekeeping system that mutual aid as a philosophy tries to avoid. Coordinators became divided on whether to enforce this verification. Therefore, the Google Form, and eventually the entire idea of redistributing cash directly, were both abandoned.  
  
According to Jess, when things get heated in general, the coordinators informally use a system they call “putting it on pause” where they take a break from the conversation, as well as in some cases, the actual system or practice in place causing the issues. This allows the coordinators to take the time to consider the guiding principles of mutual aid in light of the desire to address the needs of all participants within the community. This methodology, according to Jess, allows for a holistic approach to problem solving in which impulsive decisions can be undone, similar to a git revert or a git reset command. Reminiscent to git branching and merging, the ability to know something has been put on pause also allows coordinators to take a step back, think about and pose different solutions, then resume participating in the organization as a whole with the comfort of knowing that the issue has been resolved before involving themselves again. Often, these broader solutions emerge through research and discussion solutions used by similar organizations, supplemented using analysis of aligning philosophical and organizational theories that allow coordinators to see the bigger picture in relation to the issue directly in front of them. 

## Harnessing the Practice of Co-Creation in Radical Acts of Care

Young mutual aid organizations like Austin Covaid have much to learn about coordination from the organizational pedagogy of online peer production communities. Austin Covaid is a young, radical organization with only 9 participants involved in the decision-making process. Because of the onslaught of disasters that have occurred between 2020 and 2021, much of their praxis has involved quick thinking and immediate solutions that mirror the methodology and logic of agile software development. In addition, mutual aid organizations are new organizational concepts and as such, there is no established pedagogy surrounding broad, system-level thinking specific to the concept of mutual aid. Austin Covaid’s fork from AMA also means that the organization no longer has any support from larger, better funded organizations.  
  
In light of these issues, I suggest the idea of a meta-organization for mutual aid organizations like Austin Covaid, similar to those within peer production, where communities with similar participants and motives connect to create a meta-community in which they share techniques, stories, and emotional support related to the organizational practice of mutual aid. (Gulati et al., 2012) In peer production, participants are often involved in multiple peer production organizations, creating a network of intersecting involvement. (O’Mahony & Bechky, 2008) Like wikis, themselves a product of peer production, that discuss peer production, peer-produced, virtual meta-communities should be created, driven by the unifying desire to improve the process of mutual aid.  
  
Mutual aid organizations should educate themselves regarding the praxis of peer production in order to create larger systems of support where they can share knowledge regarding every step of the mutual aid process, from organizational design to the daily tasks within each organization. Uniting the ideas of peer production and mutual aid, as evidenced through Austin’s use of the Covaid platform, along with the creation of the platform itself, represents the potential for a hybrid form of online and on-the-ground co-collaboration in which the power of peer production and mutual aid could be used to mobilize participants towards the health of communities online and in-person.  

## Works Cited

Austin Mutual Aid | Covaid Call for Volunteers. (2020, December 6). Facebook. https://www.facebook.com/AustinMutualAid/posts/214762833491116  
  
Benkler, Y. (2016). Peer Production and Cooperation. In J. Bauer & M. Latzer (Eds.), Handbook on the Economics of the Internet. Edward Elgar Publishing. https://doi.org/10.4337/9780857939852  
  
Benkler, Y., & Nissenbaum, H. (2006). Commons-based Peer Production and Virtue. Journal of Political Philosophy, 14(4), 394–419. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9760.2006.00235.x  
  
Covaid. (2021). https://www.covaid.co  
  
Covaid Volunteer Portal. (2021). Covaid. https://www.covaid.co  
  
Fisher, L. (2020, August 21). Austin Mutual Aid Organizations Share Resources During COVID-19 and Beyond. The Austin Chronicle. https://www.austinchronicle.com/news/2020-08-21/austin-mutual-aid-organizations-share-resources-during-covid-19-and-beyond/  
  
Gardler, R., & Hanganu, G. (2013, November 12). Governance models. OSS Watch. http://oss-watch.ac.uk/resources/governancemodels  
  
Gulati, R., Puranam, P., & Tushman, M. (2012). Meta-organization design: Rethinking design in interorganizational and community contexts. Strategic Management Journal, 33(6), 571–586. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.1975  
  
Hallam, J. (2021, February 28). Conversation regarding split between Austin COVAID and Austin Mutual Aid [Personal communication].  
  
Hallam, J. (2021, March 11). Interview on Austin Covaid as an Adaptation of Peer Production (E. Seeley, Interviewer) [.Mp4].  
  
Kropotkin, P. (2006). Mutual aid: A factor of evolution. Dover Publications.  
  
Lindberg, A., Berente, N., Gaskin, J., & Lyytinen, K. (2016). Coordinating Interdependencies in Online Communities: A Study of an Open Source Software Project. Information Systems Research, 27(4), 751–772. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.2016.0673  
  
O’Mahony, S., & Bechky, B. A. (2008). Boundary Organizations: Enabling Collaboration among Unexpected Allies. Administrative Science Quarterly, 53(3), 422–459. https://doi.org/10.2189/asqu.53.3.422  
  
Oreg, S., & Nov, O. (2008). Exploring motivations for contributing to open source initiatives: The roles of contribution context and personal values. Computers in Human Behavior, 24(5), 2055–2073. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2007.09.007  
  
Purkayastha, D., Li, J., Saxena, A., Luo, A., Bangaru, S., & Zhang, J. (2021). Covaid-co/covaid-web [JavaScript]. Covaid. https://github.com/Covaid-co/covaid-web (Original work published 2020)  
  
Red, R. (2019, September 11). Hard Fork Governance. Peer Production on the Crypto Commons. https://cryptocommons.cc/blockchains-as-foss/hardfork-governance/  
  
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivations: Classic Definitions and New Directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25(1), 54–67. https://doi.org/10.1006/ceps.1999.1020  
  
Shah, S. K. (2006). Motivation, Governance, and the Viability of Hybrid Forms in Open Source Software Development. Management Science, 52(7), 1000–1014. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1060.0553  
  
Spade, D. (2019, December 4). Mutual Aid Chart. https://www.deanspade.net/2019/12/04/mutual-aid-chart/  
  
Spade, D. (2020). Solidarity Not Charity. Social Text, 38(1), 131–151. https://doi.org/10.1215/01642472-7971139  
  
Spade, D. (2020, October). Mutual Aid: Building Solidarity During this Crisis (and the Next) – Dean Spade. http://www.deanspade.net/mutual-aid-building-solidarity-during-this-crisis-and-the-next/  
  
Terranova, T. (2000). Free Labor. Social Text, 18(2), 33–58. https://doi.org/10.1215/01642472-18-2_63-33




```python

```
